feat: implement Jlink plugin (#951)
canonical/craft-parts: docs/common/craft-parts/reference/plugins/jlink_plugin.rst

Reviewer: Let's tweak the terminology so it's consistent with Oracle:

- jar → JAR
- openjdk → OpenJDK

.. _craft_parts_jlink_plugin:

JLink plugin
=============

The JLink plugin can be used for Java projects where you would want to
deploy a Java runtime specific for your application or install a minimal
Java runtime.

Keywords
--------

This plugin uses the common :ref:`plugin <part-properties-plugin>` keywords as
well as those for :ref:`sources <part-properties-sources>`.

Additionally, this plugin provides the plugin-specific keywords defined in the
following sections.

jlink-jars
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
**Type:** list of strings

List of paths to your application's JAR files. If not specified, the plugin
will find all JAR files in the staging area.

Dependencies
------------

The plugin expects OpenJDK to be available on the system and to contain
the ``jlink`` executable, unless a part named ``jlink-deps`` is defined.

> In that case, the plugin assumes that this part will stage the

Reviewer 2: Not sure if my suggestion is correct, but "this part" is ambiguous.  It could refer to the part with the `jlink` plugin or the `jlink-deps` part.

```suggestion
In that case, the plugin assumes that the ``jlink-deps`` part will stage the
```

OpenJDK installation to be used in the build step.

If the system has multiple OpenJDK installations available, one
must be selected by setting the ``JAVA_HOME`` environment variable.

.. code-block:: yaml

    parts:
      runtime:
        plugin: jlink
        build-packages:
          - openjdk-21-jdk
        build-environment:
          - JAVA_HOME: /usr/jvm/java-21-openjdk-${CRAFT_ARCH_BUILD_FOR}

The user is expected to stage OpenJDK dependencies either by installing
an appropriate OpenJDK slice:

.. code-block:: yaml

    parts:

>       runtime:
>           plugin: jlink
>           build-packages:
>             - openjdk-21-jdk
>           after:
>             - deps

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      runtime:
        plugin: jlink
        build-packages:
          - openjdk-21-jdk
        after:
          - deps
```

        deps:
          plugin: nil
          stage-packages:
            - openjdk-21-jre-headless_security

Or, by installing the dependencies directly:

.. code-block:: yaml

    parts:

>       runtime:
>           plugin: jlink
>           build-packages:
>             - openjdk-21-jdk
>           after:
>             - deps
> 
>       deps:
>           plugin: nil
>           stage-packages:
>             - libc6_libs
>             - libgcc-s1_libs
>             - libstdc++6_libs
>             - zlib1g_libs
>             - libnss3_libs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      runtime:
        plugin: jlink
        build-packages:
          - openjdk-21-jdk
        after:
          - deps

      deps:
        plugin: nil
        stage-packages:
          - libc6_libs
          - libgcc-s1_libs
          - libstdc++6_libs
          - zlib1g_libs
          - libnss3_libs
```

.. _craft_parts_jlink_plugin:

> JLink plugin

Reviewer 3: @medubelko can you review this page?

=============

The JLink plugin can be used for Java projects where you would want to

> deploy Java runtime specific for your application or install a minimal

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
deploy a Java runtime specific for your application or install a minimal
```

Java runtime.

Keywords
--------

This plugin uses the common :ref:`plugin <part-properties-plugin>` keywords as
well as those for :ref:`sources <part-properties-sources>`.

Additionally, this plugin provides the plugin-specific keywords defined in the
following sections.

jlink-jars
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
**Type:** list of strings

> List of paths to jar files of your application. If not specified, plugin

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
List of paths to your application's jar files. If not specified, the plugin
```

will find all jar files in the staging area.

Dependencies
------------

> The plugin expects OpenJDK to be available on the system and contain

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The plugin expects OpenJDK to be available on the system and to contain
```

> ``jlink`` executable, unless a part named ``jlink-deps`` is defined.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
the ``jlink`` executable, unless a part named ``jlink-deps`` is defined.
```

> In this case, the plugin will assume that this part will stage the
> openjdk to be used in the build step.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In that case, the plugin assumes that this part will stage the
OpenJDK installation to be used in the build step.
```

> If the system has multiple OpenJDK installations available, it
> should be selected by setting the ``JAVA_HOME`` environment variable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the system has multiple OpenJDK installations available, one
must be selected by setting the ``JAVA_HOME`` environment variable.
```

.. code-block:: yaml

    parts:
        runtime:
            plugin: jlink
            build-packages:
                - openjdk-21-jdk
            build-environment:

>                 - JAVA_HOME: /usr/jvm/java-21-openjdk-${CRAFT_ARCH_BUILD_FOR}

Reviewer: Per our conventions, all the YAML blocks should use two spaces of indentation after the regular text-level indentation. So it should look like this:

```
.. code-block:: yaml

    parts:
      runtime:
        plugin: jlink
    ...
```

> The user is expected to stage openjdk dependencies either by installing

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The user is expected to stage OpenJDK dependencies either by installing
```

I think we should consistently use OpenJDK

Reviewer: Seconded.

> an appropriate openjdk slice:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
an appropriate OpenJDK slice:
```

.. code-block:: yaml

    parts:
        runtime:
            plugin: jlink
            after:
                - deps

        deps:
            plugin: nil
            stage-packages:
                - openjdk-21-jre-headless_security

> or by installing the dependencies directly:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Or, by installing the dependencies directly:
```

.. code-block:: yaml

    parts:
        runtime:
            plugin: jlink
            after:
                - deps

        deps:
            plugin: nil

>             stage-packages:

Reviewer 3: how does this work? Where is the OpenJDK here?

                - libc6_libs
                - libgcc-s1_libs
                - libstdc++6_libs
                - zlib1g_libs
                - libnss3_libs

How it works
------------

During the build step, the plugin performs the following actions:

* Finds all jar files in the staging area or selects jars specified in

>   ``jlink_jars``.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  ``jlink-jars``.
```
